Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor Mark
Blythe, William A. Rhodes, professor of International Economics at
Brown University, and today we're talking about his latest
book, Inflation A Guide for Users and Losers. So,
Doctor Blythe, welcome back to the show. It's always
a pleasure to have you
everyone. It's great to be back with you.
OK, so, I mean, why did you decide to
write a book on inflation? What motivated you to
do so?
Uh, IT wasn't the inflation itself. So, We recall
that we had this inflationary burst across the world
from 21 to 24, essentially. And I had a
postdoc at the time, my co-author Nicolo Fracaro, and
he walked into my office and said, we should
do a book on inflation. I said, well, why
don't we understand this? It's always and everywhere a
monetary phenomena, blah blah blah. And he said, yes,
but it's a bit like austerity, and we had
both written books on austerity in the austerity period.
And I said, what do you mean? He says,
well it's a bit like monetary austerity. I mean,
ultimately, who gets the, who gets the short end
of the stick when you raise interest rates? Um,
PEOPLE who have become unemployed, who's that? It's people
in the bottom end of the skill and income
distribution. Uh, WHO makes out quite well from inflation,
people who hold assets that are inflation resistant like
housing, uh, people who have stocks and bonds and
companies that do well from inflation. So there's a
whole distributional story here that we don't really appreciate
it. So hence we focused on this thing of
users and losers. Second thing was, it was quite
interesting. Um, I was raised in the last inflation.
I was on the tail end of it. I
mean, it was the 70s into the 80s, and
I kind of came of age in the 1980s.
And the story that we got, which was no
longer believed by the 1990s, was what was called
the monetarist story, which is Milton Friedman's thing of
it's always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon, right? So
it's the government spending too much money. And we
noticed that this was getting a better traction in
the US because of the Biden stimulus. During COVID,
but, you know, Germany's been running a balanced budget
for the past 10 years. There's no way that
like that could explain what was going on. And
it was quite clear that what was happening was
a very big set of supply shocks, COVID shutdowns,
loss of European gas. That was kind of what
was explaining it. So, given that we all obviously
the monetary story needs to be investigated and updated.
And the third thing that we got into were
the different stories that people were telling about this.
There were rival narratives contending to explain this, and
none of them really focused on money that much.
It was what for stresses in the labor market,
wage price spirals. It was greedy corporations pushing up
prices. Uh, IT was a host of different factors
that were being pointed to. It was analogies to
the 1970s. It was analogies to the 1940s. So
we thought it would be fun to just sort
of unpack this and having not had a serious
think about inflation for the past 40 years because
there hasn't been any, try and do that now.
OK, but probably there are many people out there
who hear about inflation and they see the prices
of different kinds of products go up, but they
don't exactly know what inflation is. I mean, what
is it exactly and when do we have inflation?
Sure. Um, SO inflation is a, or I like
to call it, and we call in the book,
a rise in the general level of all prices.
So it's not when one thing like eggs or
even houses gets expensive, right? People talk about house
inflation. It's not, it's just you haven't built enough
houses. There's excess demand, the price goes up. There's
nothing inflation about that. It has to be all
prices rising together. Now, why is it hard for
people to sort of like get a grasp on
that? Because what people look at quite reasonably are
price levels. They notice that over time things get
more expensive. The the box of cereal in the
supermarket gets smaller, even though they're charging the same
price, that their cost of living is on the
up and up. So they got really annoyed with
my tribe when we say, but we looked at
80,000 items and we tracked them month by month
and we use the price deflator and we do
all this fancy statistics. And we can tell you
that the inflation rate is falling. And normal people
go, are you kidding me? It's getting more expensive
week by week. And the thing is, they're both
right, because what we're looking at is the delta,
the rate of change in prices. What they're looking
at is the absolute level of prices, and no
one lives the rate of change. No one goes,
oh, it feels so much better because prices went
down 0.2% last month. They just go, oh my
God, everything is ridiculously expensive. And when you have
a highly skewed income and wealth distribution, the people
at the bottom end of that distribution, which are
the majority of people, they're the ones that feel
it the most. So yeah, absolutely, it was a
serious problem, and there was also a serious disconnect
in the way that sort of we were measuring
it, and people would experience it.
And what is an inflation index? Uh, HOW is
it put together and what does it measure exactly?
Well that's the sausages in the factory story, isn't
it? Um, SO the big three central banks, which
is the Fed, really the biggest one, then the
ECB and the Bank of England, you could throw
in the Bank of Japan. Everyone has a way
of calculating this. So essentially what the Fed does
is it looks at 80,000 items month by month
and tracks whether they go up in price or
down in price. Now, this sounds like a sensible
thing to do, and it is, even though it's
a big task. But think about the following. At
one point, we used to use cassettes to record
music. Then we did CDs, so we swapped cassettes
for CDs. Alright, when you stop using CDs and
you start to do streaming. Do you include the
fee? Are the equivalent products? How do you cope
with things like rising, uh, let's say the uh
the quality of a good, rather than just its
price. So there's a lot of things that go
into the index and it's a best faith attempt
to basically track the general level of all prices.
But think about, for example, the world that we
live in now where we consume lots of digital
services which are ostensibly free. Right? How should that
be accounted for, because these things still generate massive
profits for companies, therefore, they are in some sense
part of prices. But we're doing this now and
it's ostensibly free. Right? So, how does that factor
in the index? So there's a lot of issues
in putting this together, but it's the best faith
attempt to track over time. The Bank of England
does about 8000, the Fed does 80,000 orders of
magnitude different, much bigger economy, but it's an attempt
to basically track all the prices and come up
with like one number, you base that to a
certain year, you call it 100 and you watch
you track changes over time.
And when it comes to fighting inflation, I know
that the typical approach includes or involves raising interest
rates. I mean, how does that work?
So this is where it started to get interesting
for me for another reason, which is there's a
lot of um interest just now, shall we say,
in the the Trump administration's attempt to tame the
Fed to their will, that is to reduce central
bank independence. And I was talking to one of
the Financial Times reporters about this, and I said,
we have to remember the central bank independence and
all this sort of stuff didn't come down from
Mount Sinai with Moses 4000 years ago on tablets.
It's actually a very recent invention that comes around
in the 1980s and actually in the 1990s, in
response to the inflationary crisis of the 1970s. Now,
why is this interesting? Because if you go back
and look at the period from 1940 to 1975,
you didn't have independent central banks with operational control
of interest rates. What you had was a variety
of different institutional measures, where central banks worked with
treasuries, they were largely in some ways the check
cashing agency for the treasury. They were not independent,
and interest rates were part of the overall policy
suite that politicians had to manipulate to try and
do things in the economy. The lesson of the
1970s was that's bad. Politicians are what economists call
time inconsistent. That is to say, they'll promise to
do one thing at a certain point, but they'll
do another point for electoral reasons. I actually call
that democracy. I'm not sure it's definitely necessarily a
problem, but in the literature it was seen to
be a problem. And therefore we needed to take
the tools away from them because only then could
we have monetary stability because they would promise not
to spend money, but they'll always spend too much.
I mean, if you look at the past 35
years, the problem across the developed world, at least,
is that they haven't spent enough. Infrastructure's falling apart,
education's underinvested. Um, THERE'S lots of problems to do
with the lack of spending. Germany's balanced budget, Schwartz
and Nhl has been a disaster for them. Even
the trains don't run on time there now. So
it's not as if these politicians have been like
spendaholics that have been held in checked only by
central banks. But that was the system that we
set up. So we stopped them spending and we've
give the banks control of interest rates. Now the
lesson there was a guy called Paul Volcker. He
was a Fed chairman in the 1970s, appointed by
Carter and then worked under Reagan. And when inflation
reached around 20% in the United States, he, well,
16%, he pushed interest rates up to about 20%.
And this basically blew a huge hole in the
economy, because if you think about it, what you're
doing is you're massively tightening everybody's credit. And it
means that the loans you've got get massively more
expensive. And if you're a company, you can't afford
to pay them, so you shut down and you
lay off your workers you have a huge recession.
And that's what happened in Britain, and that's what
happened in America in particular in the early 1980s.
And then the lesson from this was that was
a good thing. Now why would that be a
good thing? Because people had gotten used to rising
prices. And they started to base their claims for
wages on those rising prices. And you got onto
what was called the wage price spiral where they
chase each other up. And the only way to
break the psychology of expectations was to do this
jack up of interest rates, which would cause a
big recession. A lot of people would be unemployed,
bad things would happen for a while, but it
would reset expectations. And once people's prices, price expectations
are reset, then the economy can Start. Now this
is miles away from the kind of Keynesian understanding
of macroeconomics that we had since 1945 and marked
a real watershed moment to a view of price
stability being the most important thing rather than full
employment, etc. But that's essentially why we do it
and we get it from the lesson of the
Volcker recession, that it was unpleasant, it was bad,
but we had to do it. It was the
only way to break those inflationary expectations.
And does uh raising interest rates link in any
way to austerity measures, which is something we talked
about in our first conversation? Oh,
absolutely, in the sense that, and this was Nicola's
original point that made us think about writing the
book, is that when you make those people unemployed,
you're not making bankers unemployed. Right, you're not making
university professors unemployed. You, you're making the people who
are already the most vulnerable, the most cash-strapped, the
ones who pay the most for their credit, much
poorer, right? So if you're at the bottom end
of the income distribution and you're on payday loans
and you're going from check to check through a
payday lender, and you're paying 40% a month interest
or some absurd usurious rate like this, interest rates
go up. Like that's the difference between literally your
family can eat and your family doesn't eat on
a Thursday. Right? You're in the bottom 20 to
40% and you're shopping in one of the cheaper
supermarkets rather than the high end ones. Inflation goes
up to 10%, you're not eating on a Thursday.
The kids have to like make do without, right?
This is a serious, serious problem for people. Whereas
at the other end of the income distribution, I'll
give you my favorite statistic from the book, from
a paper done by economists at the University of
Amherst in the United States. In 2022, we have
to remember that what happened was a big supply
shock, insofar as gas stopped flowing into Europe. And
it took Europe a year to find that replacement
gas in the form of LNG came from Qatar,
came from the United States, right? Now, in order
to pay for that, the basic, rather, in order
to supply that, the United States, Qatar had to
divert existing supplies and increased supplies. Hard to do
in the short term, so the price of gas
went up a lot. What does that mean? It
means that if you're a firm that basically ships
or makes gas, you made a lot of money.
So much so that according to the estimates of
these guys. The top carbon firms in the United
States made $220 billion in profits above what they
would have made without the pandemic, right, according to
the normal rate of profit. Uh, AND that profitability
basically is given out to the shareholders in those
companies. Now, the top 1% of the US owns
50% of the shares. So let's assume that 50%
of that cash that was generated was given out
to the shareholders. That means that 3.3 million people
got 110 billion as a windfall just for owning
shares in those companies, which more than offset the
inflation effects that they would have felt on their
consumption, because when you're in the top 1%, a
vanishingly small part of your income goes to consumption
because you just don't buy that many loaves of
bread when you're on half a million a year.
So that was the austerity story that once again,
the poor are the ones that are going to
pay for this. One's through unemployment, and secondly through
declining consumption. In a way, it's exactly the same.
Mhm. What would be alternative policies to raising interest
rates?
Ah, now this is where it gets very interesting.
We have to go back to the 50s. The
way that economists in the 50s and 60s thought
about inflation, it was all supply chain bottlenecks. They
thought about it as there basically wasn't enough capacity.
We needed to increase capacity in the economy. When
you increase the supply side, the prices come down.
It was never about pushing interest rates up. That
was very much Volcker and the experience that we
just talked about. So they certainly thought there were
alternatives, but they also lived in a simpler world
in the sense that what you had in the
50s and 60s were largely national economies where everybody
made more or less the same stuff, traded a
little bit, financial markets were isolated, they weren't integrated,
and governments were basically dominant actors in the economy
in terms of what we call fiscal dominance, taxes
and spending rather than having these independent central banks.
So if you wanted to do things like price
controls, you could do it. I'll give you an
example of this. You can see I'm sitting in
a studio here, and right at the back here
is an Ibanez bass guitar from 1979, and it
was the first one I ever bought, costs a
lot of money back then. And uh in order
to buy this thing, I had to go to
what's called a hire purchase company. It was a
finance company. They don't exist anymore. And these were
the people that the government would license to do
things like consumer loans, and you paid a lot
of interest. I paid 18% on this thing. So
I went down every week and I gave them
money and all this sort of stuff, and it's
called hire purchase, right? Essentially you hired it from
them at a premium and then you purchase the
thing, right? Now, why was it that was a
crazy way of doing things. Why were you doing
that? Because the government could turn these things on
and off overnight. They could limit the supply of
credit. They could basically use a lot of different
instruments like that. But all of that was considered
to be inefficient and against sort of people's economic
liberty, and it all got swept away in the
1980s. Now, I'm not suggesting we go back to
that, but it says there was another way of
doing it, right? Now, here's the thing going forward.
We live in a very different world, one whereby
your inflationary shock is caused by the fact that
you make 3 quarters of the things you consume
abroad. If you're Britain, you import 40% of your
food. If you're Europe, you import 60% of your
energy and all financial markets are integrated. So sticking
up a little, you know, putting a price control
on the price of a bass guitar domestically isn't
going to do that much for it. So what
we found in the pandemic, or rather what we
found in the inflationary period, was that there were
lots of different attempts to do controls and they
tell a very mixed story. So in Hungary, they
basically said, right, supermarkets, price of bread will be
this. Any economist will tell you the minute you
do that, if the market price of bread is
higher than the reserve price, you're going to get
what's called the black market and all the supermarkets
will be empty. It's pretty much what happened. Uh,
ON the other hand, what you had in Spain
was the government there said, all right, probably not
a good idea to do this. Why don't we
help people by subsidizing other parts of their consumption
that we can do something about. So we can't
do much about the price of bread directly. Without
it being weird. So why don't we subsidize things
like public transport? Why don't we, if you're below
a certain income, subsidize electricity consumption, right? So what
you're doing is you're saying, yeah, you're taking a
hit on your income here, but we're going to
give you a subsidy there, right? That seemed to
work quite well. Uh, OTHER places tried intermediate strategies.
France basically got all their supermarkets together and said,
Don't you raise prices? And they all made a
big hoo-ha about not raising prices, and then they
went back and checked and it turned out half
of them had raised prices. Um, SO it's kind
of hard to do this stuff. Um, THE problem
with it is that it's very hard to identify
before the fact if the proposed control is going
to work. And then after the fact, even if
it seems to have worked, you have to be
careful that it wasn't other factors that were playing
into it. So what we come away with in
the book is that look, there's lots of things
you can do if your goal is not to
control inflation, but to offset the effects of it,
the austerity effects. There's a lot of things you
can do. If you really want to control the
inflation rate, it's not even. THAT pushing up interest
rates is really what's doing it. So for example,
this time, unlike Paul Volcker, where it went to
20%, nominally 16% real, whatever it was, uh, this
time, I don't think a single central bank raised
their so-called policy rate above the actual rate of
inflation. And in fact, rather than causing unemployment coming
out of the pandemic, what we got was an
increase in employment in many countries at the same
time as interest rates went up. So it's not
even clear that it was interest rates that did
the trick. Rather, what happened was there was a
big supply shock in gas for Europe. It took
Europe 1 year to 18 months to figure out
where the new gas was, and then after about
24 or 30 months, the price of gas went
down. It was that simple.
Mhm. And is it better to control wages or
to control prices?
Uh, IT'S better not to control either. I mean,
ultimately at the end of the day, right? I
mean, wages are one price. And if you try
and control wages, so for example, the Bank of
England governor came out and said it would be
terrible if people ask for a pay rise now
as prices are rising. First of all, if we
still had unions, you'd be asking for a strike,
but we don't have unions anymore, so you don't.
You have to actually have that problem in your
labor market, because even if people want a pay
rise, they can't get one, right? I mean, that's
basically why wages are so low and profits are
so high. The United States are currently 12.5% of
GDPs and corporate profits. It's never been higher, right?
So controlling wages is not your issue. Controlling prices,
it depends. We control lots of prices. Um, THROUGHOUT
Europe, the price of electricity is just completely managed
by different national authorities. There are price controls all
over these markets, for example, uh, in the United
States, we, we think it's a free market economy.
Um, THE entire healthcare sector, which is 20% of
GDP, has fictitious prices. There's no, I, I can't
actually walk into a hospital and say, hey, if
I broke my leg tomorrow, how much would this
cost, right? There's no way of finding this out.
It's all negotiated prices. So in other words, we
are controlling in some shape or form those prices.
So it's not as if, like, you know, we
don't do these things or we should or shouldn't
do these things. Like the situation is actually much
more complex. So my answer to this is it's
better to control neither and essentially try and either
attack the root causes of the inflation or buffer
the symptoms of it. That's pretty much what you
can do. Um, YOU know, some, some people whose
work I really respect suggests things like buffer stocks
and all this sort of stuff, uh, particularly now
if climate change is, uh, going to wreak havoc
eventually on food supply. Etc. We should have a
weak buffer stock. Yeah, I mean, I'm totally fine
with all that stuff, uh, except that, you know,
we have to remember we live in a world
that's already incredibly unequal, and a buffer stock requires
spending money on now on something that you might
not need in the future, which means that you're
not spending on other things that you could be
spending on now, which actually might be what people
want instead. So there's always as economists call it,
an opportunity cost of these things. So, you know,
my basic line is, I'm not against them, but
I'm not for them.
Uh, LET'S talk a little bit about the causes
of inflation. I mean, what really causes inflation and
in the ongoing inflation, the inflation we're going through,
we've heard about 4 different kinds of stories. It
was either the government or the workers or the
disruptions from the Ukraine war and the COVID-19 pandemic
or greedy corporations. Is any of these stories correct?
All of them. That's the thing, right? There's a
reason that you had these overlapping narratives, right? Now,
they're not all right in equal degree. And one
of the things that came away from the book,
we got a review of the book in the
Wall Street Journal from a very angry monetarist, uh,
who said that we were just rubbish because we
didn't talk about money enough. And our point was,
you know, can you cause an inflation with lax
government spending? Absolutely. Just look at the history of
Argentina, Venezuela, there's lots of places, right? Um, WERE
monetary factors at play in many prior, uh, episodes
of inflation. God, yeah, absolutely. But you know, alongside
of Milton Milton Friedman's story of, uh, of inflation
is always in everywhere a monetary phenomena. There's a
phrase that somebody at the Fed coined, which we
really like, which is, uh, uh, shootings are always
in everywhere a ballistic phenomena, which basically means, yeah,
sure, bullets are involved, but it doesn't tell you
about who got shot or why. Now, it's the
same thing with money. Money's always involved in inflation.
You literally can't have an inflation without money. But
was it causal? And I'll give you an example
of this, right? If you're in Latin America, and
this is pretty much the story of Latin America
forever, right? If you're in Latin America, then you
were put into the global economy 300 years ago
to produce crops for the North. 70% of all
jobs in Latin America are still tied into commodity
production, and you can just very simply do what
is it that Brazil does diversified economy, but primarily
agricultural and commodity exports. What does Argentina do same?
What is Chile do same? What is Peru do
same, etc. ETC. RIGHT? Whether it's lithium, copper, etc.
SO on. Now, if that's the case and the
world wants what you're producing, let's say it's soy
in Brazil, right? And China comes along and says,
plant more soy, we need soil. All right, great.
So you plant more soy, you burn down the
Amazon, you plant more soil. China goes, this is
great, give us more soy. And eventually what happens
is the supply begins to outstrip the demand. And
eventually that becomes a liability, and eventually the price
crashes it's called the commodity cycle. And when that
happens, because you basically export 6 or 7 things
that give you all of your foreign exchange, and
your currency is regarded as a weak currency, it's
not a trading currency, then in order to do
your imports, you need to earn dollars and your
exchange rates just crashed. Which means it's going to
take more of your money to buy the same
amount of dollars to import everything that you need
from drugs to computers to clothing, because you don't
actually make any of that stuff. So when you
do this, what happens is suddenly you get inflation
through the import channel. And the government has a
choice. It can kill that inflation by raising interest
rates, which is going to make the economic crisis
is already facing worse, or it can run the
printing presses. So it runs the printing presses. So
in a sense, is that money causing an inflation?
Well, to my point of view, the inflation started
because of the crash in the currency, because you
have a commodity dependent export economy. So yes, it's
involved, but it's a secondary cause rather than anything
else. Now to go back to the four stories,
this is why we have to be a bit
more nuanced about this. It was perfectly clear that
what happened in 2021, 2022, 23, 24 wasn't an
orgy of government spending. Germany on a balanced budget
had higher inflation in the United States. Why was
that? Because it was utterly dependent on Russian gas
and the gas pipes blew up. Literally someone blew
them up. So what you had there was a
pure supply shock, hence the story of it's a
supply shock. In the United States, you had a
bit of a supply shock with the COVID shutdown
and supply chains. But what you began to get
there was the story of the government spent too
much money. Joe Biden spent all this money during
COVID. And it's true, they spent a whopping amount
of stuff and probably too much in terms of
what they actually needed to do, but they didn't
know if they were facing the black death. They
didn't know if we're sending 80% of the labor
market home, American society would collapse, so they erred
on the side of caution. Now, the interesting thing
is, we decided to check out what happened to
all those stimulus checks that Biden spent uh sent
out that supposedly caused its inflation. And if you
go to the New York Fed Consumer Service survey
of consumer finances, you find out the vast majority
of those checks were basically spent on paying back
credit card debt literally a month later after you
got the check. And the rest of it, well,
a large chunk of it went on back rent,
people owing rents, none of which is inherently expansionary.
And also you've got 30 countries that are hit
by inflation, and only one of them is the
Biden stimulus check. So clearly there's something more going
on than that. Um, WHERE corporations involved in this?
Absolutely. Isabella Weber calls this a seller's inflation. I
prefer to call it, well, you would if you
could, wouldn't you inflation. Companies exist to make profit.
If price expectations become destabilized, then I can shove
my stuff up above what I need to do
to keep my margins. I can push on my
margins, of course, I'm going to do it. Now,
economic theory will say, but if you do that,
someone else won't do that, and they'll have cheaper
prices and they'll capture the market. Yes, but most
of our markets don't look anything like a perfectly
competitive market in the textbooks. So for example, why
is it that Canadian egg prices were always $2
cheaper than American egg prices, even though they both
had bird flu? Well, America has over 10,000 producers
of eggs, all of whom get squeezed by essentially
two companies that buy them. Now, with those companies.
GOING to basically undercut each other to supply the
egg market cheaply at that moment, or are they
going to basically try and sell you $10 eggs
and reap the profits? Of course they're going to
do that. Why would we expect anything else? But
the important caveat on this, and this is what
the people who talk about sellers inflation say. This
doesn't cause inflation, this accelerates it. It has to
start from another cause. And what happened was supply
shocks primarily, right? Then on top of that, destabilize
the expectations and then you get this effect from
corporations. Not just my opinion. European Central Bank estimated
40% of the inflation of the Eurozone in 2022
was companies pushing up prices. Now, can they do
this forever? No, markets are kind of clever that
way. Eventually things will basically sort themselves out. If
you consistently try and squeeze people, they will find
alternate suppliers. That will basically change the structure of
the market and prices will become more reasonable over
time. But ask anyone who's still doing shopping today,
have prices gone down to where they were in
2021? Not even close. And yet, supposedly, all of
that has disappeared. Well, that has to have an
explanation other than the government spent some money.
Right. So what is then hyperinflation and how does
it happen? And, and do you think that there's
actually any risk of the current inflation situation turning
into hyperinflation or not?
So we did a whole separate chapter on hyperinflation
and we looked at some classic episodes of this
Venezuela, Argentina, Zimbabwe, and Weimar, Germany in the 1920s.
And what's clear from this, and other people have
pointed this out as well, it's not, it's not
that, uh, it's not a controversial finding. Steve Hanke,
who's the sort of economist, a monetary economist at
Johns Hopkins years ago in 1985 did a big
survey, uh, of hyperinflations. And basically hyperinflation is when
everything is broken. Like when nothing works, and all
you do is run the presses because that's what
you've got left. So to go back to that
example of Latin America. What happens to Argentina and
places like this all the time is essentially that
their their currency is tied to commodities, the commodity
price crashes, the currency crashes, they need more dollars
for their imports, and they're on the printing presses
to, to pay for it. That that's it. It's
that simple. That's how you get into cycles of
hyperinflation. But more seriously, when you take places like
Venezuela, um, you essentially export one commodity, oil. And
you simultaneously basically have a political revolution that promises
massive redistribution to your constituents, uh, on the back
of oil prices which have just collapsed. And then
you essentially scare off all the people who actually
know how to run an oil company, and you
fill it with your friends. That's not gonna end
well, that's basically what happened, right? Um, Zimbabwe, I
mean, if everything could go wrong, it did go
wrong, they end up embroiled in wars in the
1990s. They ended up trying to, uh, redistribute land
in such a way that it was so economically
inefficient in terms of the small parcel size that
no farmers ended up with. So not only did
they not know how to do this because there's
a skill deficit, what you also up with the
banks weren't able to actually use the land as
collateral to extend credit. So the government gets into
the market to do this and then extends it
to people who actually can't really farm at scale,
just problem after problem after problem. It it's state
failure. You, you get hyperinflation when the state falls
apart. That's basically it. Or alternative. You have one
of these highly volatile commodity dependent currencies. That's, that's
the history of hyperinflation. Now, does that characterize any
place like, you know, I don't know, the United
States? No. China, no, um, anywhere in Western Europe,
Eastern Europe, no. Um, SO, you know, when do
these places get hyperinflation after wars. After World War
One, when they don't fight the war by raising
taxes, and they basically have issued a whole bunch
of debt and the debt goes bad. Simple. It's
all about state failure.
So, uh, but I mean, about the second part
of my question, do you think that there's any
risk that the, uh, inflation we are experiencing could
spiral into hype,
because that's the point that it's not a spiral,
right? It's not a slippery slope. That's the mistake.
People that you get a little bit of inflation,
you get a little bit more, you get more.
And like if you run a kind of Straight
expectations model on this. It's kind of weird because
people are meant to have far-sighted what it's called
rational expectations. And if they actually have rational expectations,
they would know that what they're seeing is a
supply shock. They wouldn't become confused. There wouldn't be
any inflation in the first place because it wouldn't
get de-anchored. Given the fact that prices are rising,
clearly either that mechanism is wrong or we're missing
a beat in this sort of thing. And that
suggests to me that basically it's not really about
expectation that people begin to say, next month, everything
will be worth 1000 times less, right? It's just
the fact that basically the supply chains that supply
really basic things in the economy no longer work,
and prices go up and people try and adapt
to that. So again, it's not like a spiral
of expectations where 2% goes to 4%, 4 goes
to 88 goes to 16, and you get this
geometric series. What happens is it's relatively stable, it
gets a bit high, and then it becomes astronomical
because the basic institutions that make market economies and
states work are falling apart.
Mhm. Is it possible to predict inflation, uh, and
why didn't we see this inflation coming?
Um, SO the way that we approach this in
the book is to sort of say, OK, uh,
the 1970s playbook, we learned a lot from the
1970s, not sure that we learned the right things.
So first of all, you need to have a
huge rise in interest rates to cross inflation. None
of the central banks did this this time because
they knew that after a decade of austerity in
Europe, in particular, lost growth and rising populism, if
they just decided to make 10 to 15% of
the population unemployed to save the value of financial
assets, they would have burned the central bank down.
So, you know, there's no way that this was
going to happen, right? So that's, that's point number
one. Um, POINT number 2, the inflation in the
1970s, was it really a monetary phenomenon was in
everywhere? Well, Alan Blinder, who's a central banker and
economics professor at Princeton, he's done a whole series
of papers on this over the past 30 years,
basically saying, no, it was all just supply shocks.
And if you think about it that way, then,
you know, they're much more like what happened in
2021. It's just that there was a decade of
interlinked supply shocks in the late 60s and the
70s. Uh AND we interpreted this as a monetary
shock when in fact, you know, it probably wasn't.
I'm quite sympathetic to that view. So if that's
the case, should we take the playbook of the
70s and apply it? Well, in a sense, that's
what we did. We relied on the central banks,
we raised interest rates. Uh, AND in that sense,
you know, the people who are charged with looking
out for inflation, as always in everywhere a monetary
phenomena were genuinely surprised because it came from non-monetary
sources, blowing up a pipeline and a pandemic, right?
But at the same time, were they totally surprised
by it in the sense that they clearly didn't
know what to do. Well, the fact that they
didn't push interest rates all the way up like
they did in the early 1980s suggests to me
that they had been reading their own research over
the prior 10 years. And what that research had
shown is that inflation didn't seem to be anywhere
for a very long time. The so-called Phillips curve,
which basically charts the relationship between unemployment and inflation
and kind of as a measure of capacity of
the economy is a thing called the Nehru, uh,
all that sort of stuff was basically either flat
or jumping around all over the place. You could
have any level of unemployment you want at a
constant level of inflation over a 20 year period
in a lot of countries. So it kind of
made them think that inflation, you know, was gone.
And if you have a 1970s story of it's
always about money, and you're looking at money and
money's not doing much, then it's quite reasonable not
to expect inflation. The surprise was the fact that
it came from primarily non-monetary sources in this instance.
So, the subtitle of your book is a guide
for users and losers. So does inflation affect everyone
equally or who are the actual winners and losers
of inflation?
So this is again to go back to that
first point that Nick said when he walked into
the office about monetary austerity, who actually wins and
who actually loses, and I've mentioned some of this
already. You're in the bottom 20% of the income
distribution, you spend 80% of your paycheck on consumption
goods. That's what gets hit when prices go up.
So that's hugely serious for you. Same in the
bottom 40%. If you're in the top 1%, you're
getting windfall gains from the fact that you own
oil stocks. So there's a hugely different experience of
inflation. And it's not that we all suffer from
inflation, as people like to say, we simply don't.
Some of us benefit from inflation, and we benefit
in weird and unexpected ways. So let me give
you one story from Scotland about this. And this
is a great story of like why it's difficult
to do controls and unintended consequences. So Edinburgh has
very expensive rents because, uh, in part it looks
like Harry Potter land and that's where JK Rowling
wrote all the books and it's got loads of
tourists. Consequently, about a large part of the city
is all Airbnb rentals. Now there's still some places
where normal people can rent houses and students can
rent apartments and so on and so forth, but
it's pretty constricted. It's already quite expensive. So the
Scottish government said quite reasonably, all right, for as
long as this pandemic's on, nobody gets to get
thrown out of their of their apartment, right? We're
basically saying a moratorium on evictions. And that meant
that basically this could continue for a couple of
years. If you're a landlord, you've got people in
there, they might already, they might not be good
tenants, they might not be paying you. You're basically
now stuck with the bill, uh, or alternatively, you
know, you make your living off of real estate
and the government just said to you, you're not
making your living off of real estate, you're providing
a social service. And those landlords said, all right,
so how's the legislation written? OK. It doesn't apply
to super short term rentals. Guess what happened? They
used every trick in the book to get people
out and turned even more of the place into
Airbnbs. What did that do? It constricted the supply
of actual rentals and prices went up 30% in
two years. So it completely blew back in that
way, right? So who benefited here? A very small
group of landlords defending their interests and their profits,
who suffered because of this? Everybody who rents. Right,
so the idea again that we all suffer from
this just isn't the case. Now, you could say
that was bad policy design, they shouldn't have tried
to do, uh, controls, but if they hadn't, it
still would have been that asymmetry between those who
own the asset that everybody needs and those who
basically have incomes that are buffeted by inflation. So
that distributional trade-off is still there. Um, OTHER ones,
um, people may want to think about how much
they didn't get from their bank because of the
inflation. And what I mean is, most people have
what the US call a checking account for day
to day transactions and a savings account which pays
basically almost nothing. So you get 1%, 2% in
your in your account. Well, interest rates went to
4.5, 5% in some places. So in theory then,
what should happen is that interest rate rises, what's
called the interest rate margin. Some of that should
be passed on to the depositors in the bank.
And if they don't, that means the bank's taking
it as a windfall profit. The banks took it
as a windfall profit, so much so that Italy
tried to tax that back as a windfall to
varying degrees of success, but essentially what it meant
was the banks benefited from rising interest rates and
the people who fund the bank, at least notion
like the depositors, really didn't benefit from it. Uh,
I'll close with my favorite example of this is
who, who, who benefits from this, uh, Cristiano Ronaldo.
Because during this period, this is when the Saudis
had so much money from their carbon oil profits
going up, that they set up the Saudi Pro
League, and they bought stars from all over the
world, most notably Cristiano Ronaldo, pay them absurd amounts
of money to play in a league that nobody
cares about. And you can do that because you're
the one that's benefiting from these windfall profits. So
basically the last chapter of the book is about
who wins and who loses, and it turns out
quite a lot of people win. And the losses
as ever are very, very concentrated, and the standard
story is completely correct. It's people in the bottom
end of the income distribution who get hurt the
most.
So since just recently Trump implemented these tariffs across
the world, this is a very relevant topic to
ask you about. What are the effects of tariffs
and trade wars on inflation?
So it's actually it's much harder to predict and
people think, because, you know, we think about this
in a very textbook way, a tariff is a
tax. Somebody has to pay the tax. It's a
combination of the export of the import and the
consumer. Therefore, that will either hit consumption and our
prices will go up. That's the standard story, makes
perfect sense. But the thing is, we make things
on a global basis, and we sell and swap
them around on a global basis. And parts travel
across borders multiple times. So for example, car parts
in the United States that are made in Canada
go across the border multiple times, they're tariff multiple
times. That's why firms like GM are taking enormous
hits just now because of the tariffs. They're trying
to hold the line on this. Like I said,
corporate profits have really been high for a long
time. They can afford to take a hit, particularly
in some sectors rather than others. But we haven't
seen it show up in that one. One translation.
Why? Because, you know, economics works with this thing
called the Ketteris paribus clause, all things remaining equal.
And in a global economy that's highly dynamic, nothing
ever remains equal. People adjust. Sometimes the exchange rate
will take a bit of a hit, sometimes the
importer will take a bit of a hit, sometimes
the exporter will find somewhere else to ship it
through. There's lots of ways in which this doesn't
have that one on one translation. Now, will it
eventually show up in lower consumption or higher prices?
Yes, because the government's making $300 billion or whatever
it is in tariffs over the 6 months they've
been in, or maybe it's a month or something
crazy like this. I don't know what the latest
estimates are, but they're making hundreds of billions of
dollars, which means that someone else isn't. And if
those people want to maintain their profit margins and
continue to produce and continue to employ people, prices
are going to have to go up somewhere. So
one way to think about tariffs is it's basically
a policy induced supply shock, which will have inflationary
qualities.
Is our future going to be more inflationary or
can we return to low inflation?
So there's two big forces at work here, and
rather than sort of focusing on central banks who
have been, you know, the guardians of monetary discipline
for the past 30 years and saying that's what
caused low prices, um, I'm, I'm sure that's implicated
in it. But another one is a very simple
one, was China joined the global economy and half
a billion people added to the global labor supply.
At the same time as we had an IT
revolution and a container ship revolution, which meant that
along with inventory control and just in time manufacturing,
prices went down, down, down, down, down for a
very long time. Many of those forces now because
of geopolitics, because of tariffs, uh, simply because of
Chinese people are getting richer, um, those prices are
going back up. So we live through this 30
year period of very, very low prices and very
low inflation, that might be reversing. On the other
hand, capitalism is essentially on a micro level on
a macro level of deflation machine. We don't think
about this because everyone's always worried about inflation, but
it's kind of a weird way of thinking about
it. We give an example in the book of
a car called the Golf Volkswagen Golf GTI, and
it came in in 1978, cost about 10,000 pounds
in British pounds, $16,000 or whatever. And back then,
you know, great car, but like, you know, barely
had seat belts, didn't have airbags. There's no ABS.
There's no computer. Don't even know if I ever
had central air conditioning at that point in time.
The car you get now is like incredible in
comparison. It's more powerful, it's safer, it has all
these gadgets, all the rest of it. And if
you basically put it in $1978 it's a 3%
cheaper. Now why is that? Because lots of other
people make good cars too. And that creates competition
and competition lowers prices, and that means that overtime
prices go down. So on a micro level, capitalism,
the deflation machine. On a macro level, this is
also true. Why? Because companies would countries would rather
be exporters rather than importers, wrongheaded, but that's the
way they do it. So the world basically has,
since the East Asian financial crisis, most of East
Asia exports. Uh, Japan's historically an exporter, even though
it's a large economy. Uh, China, even though it's
a very, the largest economy, is a massive exporter,
and, uh, the people who do the imports are
basically the Anglo countries on the other side of
the trade. And for a long time, those low
prices coexist. IN a kind of, uh, if you
will, social bargain, which was we'll shove our manufacturing
over there where it's cheap. We get low prices
for our consumers, which is equivalent to a wage
rise without having to give them a wage rise
while we take all the profits, right? That was
basically the bargain that was made. And you know,
when you're in that position, if you're one of
these countries. Um, PARTICULARLY after the East Asian financial
crisis when the IMF roughed them up, they all
decided that they wanted to have big reserves to
protect themselves. How do you protect yourself? You basically
run an export surplus. Europe runs an export surplus
via Germany, China runs an export surplus. So what
happens if everybody's trying to export and then there's
only a couple of countries that do the imports.
Prices have to fall, you've got too much supply.
Right, so there's an inherent deflationary tendency of the
global economy. Now what's on the other side that
could change this? One is Chinese labor is no
longer cheap. That's part of the argument of Charles
Goodhart. Another one that Charles Goodhart points out is
demography. That basically we're shifting in such a way
now that, uh, essentially as populations get older, there's
less younger people to work for them, high social
wages, etc. IN the form of pensions, etc. All
of that's going to be inflationary in some sense,
all of which is probably true. But the other
one that we're not thinking about is climate change,
that essentially, once you basically bust through some of
the critical limits. 1.5, 2 degrees. Food webs come
under pressure. Um, SUPPLY chains will not be able
to adapt rapidly. Simple examples, the Po Valley in
Italy is drying out, Spain's drying out. Scotland had
wildfires. I know people like to point out that
no, it's not, it's arsonists. It's like, look, there's
no arsonists in the north of Canada where nobody
lives in these huge wildfires, right? So the climate
is actually changing whether we like it or not,
and that's going to have very, very interesting supply
shock effects. Now, the Potsdam Institute on Climate Research
has already done estimates on this, and we include
them in the book. It came out just before
we went to press, and their estimate that it's
already pushing up food prices by 2 to 3%
a year across the globe. Some places much more
affected by others. So we have these two forces
basically trading off against each other. One is essentially
sort of the inherently deflationary tendencies of capitalism, and
the other one is basically climate change, demography, and
technology shocks all pushing in another direction. So, if
I had to put my heart on it, I
think that we had a 30 year period of
exceptionally low inflation, and now we're back to a
much more normal and accelerating a much more normal
world, which is actually an accelerating period of inflation,
not to hyperinflation, but just inflationary spurts because of
supply shocks.
So one last question then, is there anything that
people should do to prepare for the future?
That's a huge question that goes far beyond anything
I can usefully say in a couple of minutes
or even as regards the book, I mean. It's
very hard to say, it's not something that's solved
on an individual level basis because it's kind of
a systemic property, right? So you could say, OK,
if I think the world's going to be more
inflationary, what should I do? I should buy gold,
right? I should buy Bitcoin, which is digital gold.
I should buy houses because people always need houses.
And, and none of these strategies are probably wrong,
but, you know, is that actually really protecting us
against what the ultimate underlying problem might be, which
is We've all gotten a little bit tired of
net zero goals. We don't want to think about
the green stuff anymore. Electricity is too expensive as
it is. Nobody likes windmills. The Americans are turning
against green tech massively at the same time as
China's doubling down on it. These are the forces
that are really going to shape the world. Inflation
is going to be a byproduct of these things,
and it's very hard for people to control those
things on an individual level. So I would say
basically, Don't keep your savings in cash, try and
diversify, make sure you got a house, and that's
a tall order in most countries these days.
Mhm. OK, great. So the book is again inflation,
a guide for users and losers. I'm, of course,
leaving a link to it in the description of
the interview and Doctor Blythe, thank you so much
for taking the time to come on the show
again. It's always a pleasure to everyone.
That's great. It was lovely to talk to you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearraujurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Francaortolotti Gabriel Ponscorteseus
Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diosta, Anton Eriksson,
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow
atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael
Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray, Zigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake
Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson,
Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda
Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman,
Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aart, Liam Dunaway, BR
Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff Se Nelson, Mike Levin, ands Necht.
A special thanks to my producers. These are Webb,
Jim, Frank Lucas Stephenik, Tom Venneden, Bernardin Curtis Dixon,
Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian
Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortis and Nick Golden, and to
my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivas,
and Rosie. Thank you for all.